Release 2.21.0 (#8325)
timescale/timescaledb: CHANGELOG.md

`psql` with the `-X` flag to prevent any `.psqlrc` commands from
accidentally triggering the load of a previous DB version.**

## 2.21.0 (2025-07-08)

This release contains performance improvements and bug fixes since the 2.20.3 release. We recommend that you upgrade at the next available opportunity.

> **Highlighted features in TimescaleDB v2.21.0**
> * Attach & Detach chunks
> * improved backfill / UPSERT
> * deletes of non-segmentby columns 42x faster with less IO & bloat
> * concurrent CAgg refresh policies
> * direct compress (tech preview)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Highlighted features in TimescaleDB v2.21.0**
* The attach & detach chunks feature allows manually adding or removing chunks from a hypertable with uncompressed chunks, similar to PostgreSQL’s partition management.
* Continued improvement of backfilling into the columnstore, achieving up to 2.5x speedup for constrained tables, by introducing caching logic that boosts throughput for writes to compressed chunks, bringing `INSERT` performance close to that of uncompressed chunks.
* Optimized `DELETE` operations on the columstore through batch-level deletions of non-segmentby keys in the filter condition, greatly improving performance of up to 42x faster in some cases, as well as reducing bloat, and lowering resource usage.
* The locking mechanism for Continuous Aggregate refresh policies was removed, enabling concurrent refreshes for non-overlapping ranges and eliminating the need for complex customer workarounds.
* [tech preview] Direct Compress is an innovative TimescaleDB feature that improves high-volume data ingestion by compressing data in memory and writing it directly to disk, reducing I/O overhead, eliminating dependency on background compression jobs, and significantly boosting insert performance.
```

> * The locking mechanism for Continuous Aggregate refresh policies was removed, enabling concurrent refreshes for non-overlapping ranges and eliminating the need for complex customer workarounds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The heavy lock taken in Continuous Aggregate refresh was relaxed, enabling concurrent refreshes for non-overlapping ranges and eliminating the need for complex customer workarounds.
```
What I want to say here is that not only the refresh policy get rid of heavy locks, but also a manual refresh running the `refresh_continuous_aggregate` procedure (that is used for customers workarounds).

**Sunsetting of the hypercore access method**
We made the decision to deprecate hypercore access method (TAM) with the 2.21.0 release. It was an experiment, which did not show the signals we hoped for and will be sunsetted in TimescaleDB 2.22.0, scheduled for September 2025. Upgrading to 2.22.0 and higher will be blocked if TAM is still in use. Since TAM’s inception in [2.18.0](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/releases/tag/2.18.0), we learned that btrees were not the right architecture. The recent advancements in the columnstore—such as more performant backfilling, SkipScan, adding check constraints, and faster point queries—put the [columnstore](https://www.timescale.com/blog/hypercore-a-hybrid-row-storage-engine-for-real-time-analytics) close to or on par with TAM without the storage from the additional index. We apologize for the inconvenience this action potentially causes and are here to assist you during the migration process.

Migration path

```

> -- Find all hypertables that use the hypercore access method
> SELECT c.oid::regclass AS table from pg_class c JOIN pg_am am ON (c.relam=am.oid AND am.amname='hypercore');
> 
> -- Set table access method back to `heap`
> ALTER TABLE <hypertable> SET ACCESS METHOD heap;
> 
> -- Recompress all chunks of the hypertable again
> SELECT decompress_chunk(c.oid::regclass), compress_chunk(c.oid::regclass) 
> FROM pg_class c inner join pg_am am ON c.relam=am.oid
> AND am.amname='hypercore' 
> WHERE c.relnamespace='_timescaledb_internal'::regnamespace;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
do $$
declare   
   relid regclass;
begin
   for relid in
       select cl.oid from pg_class cl
       join pg_am am on (am.oid = cl.relam)
       where am.amname = 'hypercore'
   loop
       raise notice 'converting % to heap', relid::regclass;
       execute format('alter table %s set access method heap', relid);
   end loop;
end
$$;
```

`psql` with the `-X` flag to prevent any `.psqlrc` commands from
accidentally triggering the load of a previous DB version.**

## 2.21.0 (2025-07-08)

This release contains performance improvements and bug fixes since the 2.20.3 release. We recommend that you upgrade at the next available opportunity.

**Highlighted features in TimescaleDB v2.21.0**
* Attach & Detach chunks
* improved backfill / UPSERT
* deletes of non-segmentby columns 42x faster with less IO & bloat

> * parallel CAgg refresh policies

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* concurrent CAgg refresh policies
```

Migration path

```
-- Find all hypertables that use the hypercore access method
SELECT c.oid::regclass AS table from pg_class c JOIN pg_am am ON (c.relam=am.oid AND am.amname='hypercore');

-- Set table access method back to `heap`
ALTER TABLE <hypertable> SET ACCESS METHOD heap;

-- Recompress all chunks of the Hypertable again
SELECT decompress_chunk(c.oid::regclass), compress_chunk(c.oid::regclass) 
FROM pg_class c inner join pg_am am ON c.relam=am.oid
AND am.amname='hypercore' 

> WHERE c.relnamespace='_timescaledb_internal'::regnamespace;

Reviewer 3: Hmm, I guess the decompression will get it back to heap.

> WHERE c.relnamespace='_timescaledb_internal'::regnamespace;

Reviewer: Yes, it was tested.

* [#8209](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8209) Add experimental support for Direct Compress of `COPY`

**Bugfixes**
* [#8153](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8153) Restoring a database having NULL compressed data
* [#8164](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8164) Check columns when creating new chunk from table
* [#8294](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8294) The "vectorized predicate called for a null value" error for WHERE conditions like `x = any(null::int[])`.
* [#8307](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8307) Fix missing catalog entries for bool and null compression in fresh installations
* [#8323](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8323) Fix DML issue with expression indexes and BHS

**GUCs**
* `enable_direct_compress_copy`: Enable experimental support for direct compression during `COPY`, default: off
* `enable_direct_compress_copy_sort_batches`: Enable batch sorting during direct compress `COPY`, default: on
* `enable_direct_compress_copy_client_sorted`: Correct handling of data sorting by the user is required for this option, default: off

> * `enable_optimizations`: Enable TimescaleDB query optimizations. default: on

Reviewer 2: This isn't a new GUC, it exists since forever (as far I remember). Do we need to mention it here?

Reviewer: Hmm, weird that it shows up now .. I did a `git diff 2.20.x..main guc.c` -- anyway I remove it! Thank you for pointing it out

Reviewer: resolved via https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8325/commits/731a97195d7929e8bbf73e18116cff90955e854e
